Meta (#2)
mvadari/XRPL-Standards: meta-xls.md

* [XLS-50](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/discussions/145) (Expanded TOML info for validators)

## 3.4. Meta XLSes

This category contains standards that pertain to XLSes themselves, such as this document.

# 4. XLS Process

Every XLS must have a status included in its heading:

* **Idea**: An idea that is pre-draft. This is reflected by the “pre-proposal idea” category in the existing XLS discussions.
* **Discussion**: An idea that is pre-draft. This is any other discussion in the Discussions section of the `XRPL-Standards` repo.
* **Draft**: The first formally tracked stage of an XLS in development. An XLS is merged by an XLS Editor into the XLS repository when properly formatted. XLS numbers will be assigned at this stage.
* **Final**: This XLS represents the final standard. A `Final` XLS exists in a state of finality and should only be updated to correct errata and add non-normative clarifications. For rippled-related XLSes, the XLS can only be considered `Final` once the rippled PR has been merged. For other XLSes, there needs to be at least one project that has implemented full support of the Standard.

> * **Deprecated**: This is an XLS in any category that was deprecated, as it is no longer supported. Due to the nature of XRP Ledger such features, especially amendment ones, may or may not be permanently removed from the codebase. Only a `Final` feature may be `Deprecated` .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Living**: A special status for XLSs that are designed to be continually updated and not reach a state of finality. This includes, for example, this XLS.
* **Deprecated**: This is an XLS in any category that was deprecated, as it is no longer supported. Due to the nature of XRP Ledger such features, especially amendment ones, may or may not be permanently removed from the codebase. Only a `Final` or `Living` feature may be `Deprecated` .
```

* **Stagnant**: Any XLS in `Draft` if inactive for a period of 6 months or greater is moved to `Stagnant`. An XLS may be resurrected from this state by Authors or XLS Editors through moving it back to Draft.
* **Withdrawn**: The XLS Author(s) have withdrawn the proposed XLS. This state has finality and can no longer be resurrected using this XLS number. If the idea is pursued at a later date it is considered a new proposal.
  * If the XLS is withdrawn because it is superseded, the newer replacement XLS is linked.

> * **Living**: A special status for XLSs that are designed to be continually updated and not reach a state of finality. This includes, for example, this XLS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* **Appendix** (optional): Other information pertaining to the spec that are not strictly a part of the spec, such as tradeoffs and alternate approaches considered.
  * **FAQ** (optional): A list of questions the author expects to be asked about the spec, and their answers. It is highly recommended but not required to include this section, to make it easier for spec readers to understand it.

### 4.3.1. Preamble

Each XLS must begin with an [RFC 822](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc822.txt) style header preamble, contained in a `<pre>` HTML block. The headers must appear in the following order.

> * `xls`: XLS number

Reviewer: Perhaps it should be made clear as soon as possible in the document that XLSs would be assigned by the editors, not the authors.
```suggestion
* `xls`: XLS number (assigned by the Editors)
```

* `title`: The XLS title is a few words, not a complete sentence
* `description`: Description is one full (short) sentence

> * `author`: The list of the author’s or authors’ name(s) and/or username(s), or name(s) and email(s). Details are below.

Reviewer: We can probably remove the last sentence. I think it was carry over from the old doc, as in the current version there are no additional details.
```suggestion
* `author`: The list of the author’s or authors’ name(s) and/or username(s), or name(s) and email(s).
```

* `status`: `Draft`, `Final`, `Stagnant`, `Withdrawn`, `Living`
* `category`: One of `Amendment`, `System`, `Community`, or `Meta`.
* `created`: Date the XLS was created on
* `requires`: XLS number(s) (Optional field)
* `withdrawal-reason`: A sentence explaining why the XLS was withdrawn. (Optional field, only needed when status is Withdrawn. If this proposal was superseded by another, that can be listed here.)

> 

Reviewer: I'm updating the pseudo-account spec, and such field is very useful to differentiate between when the spec was created and last updated. The spec last update should be disassociated with the commit, as a commit may not actually update a spec.

> 

Author: This feels rather difficult to have updated correctly, especially given that XLSes are merged by the editors who are not always the authors

*Note: all fields specified above in the “Drafts and Onward” section must also be included here.*

### 4.4.1. Index

A Markdown index to make navigating a long specification easier. This field is optional and left to the author’s discretion.

### 4.4.2. Introduction

A section to succinctly introduce the protocol that the amendment introduces.

* **Terminology** (optional): A section to provide a glossary of terms used across the specification.
* **System Diagram** (optional): For complex protocols a system diagram that describes the relationship between different components of the system.
* **Summary**
  * **Ledger Objects**: A list of ledger objects and their purpose introduced by the amendment.
  * **Transactions**: A list of transactions and their purpose introduced by the amendment.
  * **API**: A list of RPCs and their purpose introduced by the amendment (if applicable).

### 4.4.3. Specification

The technical specification describing the syntax and semantics of a new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations. See below for details.

This will be codified in a template later.

#### 4.4.3.1. Ledger Entries

> Ledger Entries documents one or more new ledger entry objects introduced or modified by the specification. Each ledger entry must be in its own numbered section. The following sections should be in each section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ledger Entries documents one or more new ledger entry objects introduced or modified by the specification. Each ledger entry must be in its own numbered section with the following subsections:
```

##### 4.4.3.1.1. Object Identifier

Each object on the XRP Ledger must have a unique object identifier (ID or key). The ID for a given object within the ledger is calculated using "tagged hashing". This involves hashing some object-specific parameters along with a type-specific prefix called the `key space` (a 16-bit value) to ensure that different objects have different IDs, even if they use the same set of parameters The key space is given as a `hex` representation in the specification. This section introduces the key space and the algorithm for how to calculate a unique object identifier. It is critical that the algorithm does not create collisions between two objects.

##### 4.4.3.1.2. Fields

> This subsection lists the object fields, indicating whether a field is constant or optional, its JSON type (for reference, actual storage is binary), Internal Type, and Default Value. The field table MUST include all standard ledger entry fields (like `LedgerEntryType`, `Flags`, `PreviousTxnID`, `PreviousTxnLgrSeq`, `OwnerNode`) as well as fields unique to the ledger entry. The `Account` field is typical for objects owned by a single account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This subsection describes the ledger entry fields in a tabular format, indicating whether a field is constant or optional, its JSON type (for reference, actual storage is binary), Internal Type, and Default Value. The field table MUST include all standard ledger entry fields (like `LedgerEntryType`, `Flags`, `PreviousTxnID`, `PreviousTxnLgrSeq`, `OwnerNode`) as well as fields unique to the ledger entry. The `Account` field is typical for objects owned by a single account.
```

Author: Some objects have `Account`, some have `Owner`. We should standardize at some point going forward.

 * **Constant**: Indicates whether the Ledger Entry field is mutable after creation.
   * **Yes**: the field is constant.
   * **No**: the field is not constant.
 * **Required**: Indicates whether the field is required for the object to be valid. 
   * **Yes**: The field is required
   * **No**: The field is optional.
   * **Conditional**: The field is required under certain circumstances, described in the subsection following the fields table.
 * **Internal Type**: The internal data type of the field. Refer to [this page](https://xrpl.org/docs/references/protocol/binary-format#type-list) for all internal types (e.g., `UINT16`, `ACCOUNT`, `HASH256`). Internal types must be in all capital letters. Please refer to [`sfields.macro`](https://github.com/XRPLF/rippled/blob/develop/include/xrpl/protocol/detail/sfields.macro) for a list of existing internal types.
 * **Default Value**: The field's default value when the ledger entry is created.
   * `N/A`: The field does not have a default value or is always required.
 * **Description**: A brief description of the field. Further details can be written in a subsection of **Fields**.

> Following the table of fields, there may optionally be a list of fields that require further details that are too long for the Description column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fields table may be followed by subsections for fields requiring further details that are too long for the Description column.
```

*Note: there are a handful of object types (such as `FeeSettings`) that don’t have an owner. If an amendment is of that ilk, that should be specified in this section.*

##### 4.4.3.1.4. Reserves

Creating ledger entries typically requires an increase in the owner's XRP reserve to discourage ledger bloat and account for the cost of storage. Each new ledger entry directly owned by an account typically increments the owner reserve by one unit (currently 0.2 XRP, as of last check, but subject to change by [Fee Voting](https://xrpl.org/docs/concepts/consensus-protocol/fee-voting)). This section should confirm whether this standard behavior applies or specify any deviations.

##### 4.4.3.1.5. Deletion

This subsection captures the conditions under which the ledger entry can be deleted from the ledger. It should specify:
* What transaction(s) can delete the object.
* Any prerequisite conditions for deletion (e.g., object state, zero balances, no linked objects).
* Is the ledger entry a "blocker" for deleting its owner `AccountRoot` (i.e., whether it must be deleted before the account can be deleted).

##### 4.4.3.1.6. Pseudo-Account

> This section is optional. A "pseudo-account" might be associated if the newly introduced ledger entry needs to hold assets (XRP, IOUs or MPTs) or issue tokens (e.g., MPTs). A pseudo-account is a programmatically derived `Account` that cannot submit transactions, send or receive funds directly via standard payments, or have a key pair. fFor further details about pseudo-accounts, refer to [XLS-64](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/pull/274) (or the relevant accepted standard). This section should specify if a pseudo-account is used, how its `AccountID` is derived, and its purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section is optional. A "pseudo-account" might be associated if the newly introduced ledger entry needs to hold assets (XRP, IOUs or MPTs) or issue tokens (e.g., MPTs). A pseudo-account is a programmatically derived `Account` that cannot submit transactions, send or receive funds directly via standard payments, or have a key pair. For further details about pseudo-accounts, refer to [XLS-64](https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/pull/274) (or the relevant accepted standard). This section should specify if a pseudo-account is used, how its `AccountID` is derived, and its purpose.
```
